5. ResultSet Fetching

Having discussed the SQL statement optimizations (batching and caching), it is time to move on to the response part of a query processing. Unlike the insert, update, and delete statements, which only return the affected row count, a JDBC select query returns a ResultSet instead.

The database Executor takes an execution plan and fetches data into a result set. Rows may be either extracted at once or upon being requested by the database client.

The SQL Standard defines both the result set and the cursor descriptor through the following properties:

scrollability (the direction in which the result set can be iterated)

sensitivity (when should data be fetched)

updatability (available for cursors, it allows the client to modify records while traversing the result set)

holdability (the result set scope in regard to a transaction lifecycle).

Following the standard specification, the JDBC ResultSet offers support for all the properties above.

Table 5.1: JDBC ResultSet properties

Property Name Description TYPE_FORWARD_ONLY The result set can only be iterated from the first to the last element. This is the default scrollability value.

TYPE_SCROLL_INSENSITIVE The result set takes a loading time snapshot which can be iterated both forward and backward.

TYPE_SCROLL_SENSITIVE The result set is fetched on demand while being iterated without any direction restriction.

CONCUR_READ_ONLY The result set is just a static data projection which does not allow row-level manipulation. This is the default changeability value.

CONCUR_UPDATABLE The cursor position can be used to update or delete records, or even insert a new one.

CLOSE_CURSORS_AT_COMMIT The result set is closed when the current transaction ends.

HOLD_CURSORS_OVER_COMMIT The result set remains open even after the current transaction is committed.

5.1 ResultSet scrollability

The JDBC ResultSet can be traversed using an application-level cursor. The fetching mechanism is therefore hidden behind an iterator API, which decouples the application code from the data retrieval strategy. Some database drivers prefetch the whole result set on the clientside, while other implementations retrieve batches of data on a demand basis.

By default, the ResultSet uses a forward-only application-level cursor, which can be traversed only once, from the first position to last one. Although this is sufficient for most applications, JDBC also offers scrollable cursors, therefore allowing the row-level pointer to be positioned freely (in any direction and on every record).

The main difference between the two scrollable result sets lays in their selectivity. An insensitive cursor offers a static view of the current result set, so the data needs to be fetched entirely prior to being iterated. A sensitive cursor allows the result set to be fetched dynamically so it can reflect concurrent changes.

Oracle

Since the database engine does not offer support for scrollable result sets, the JDBC driver emulates it on top of a client-side caching mechanisma. As a consequence, the result set should not be too large as, otherwise, it can easily fill the client application memory.

A sensitive scrollable result set is limited to selecting data from a single table only.

ahttps://docs.oracle.com/database/121/JJDBC/resltset.htm#JJDBC[^28615]

SQL Server

All three cursor types are supported. An insensitive scroll generates a server-side database snapshot, which the client fetches in batches. The sensitive scroll uses a server-side updatable window and changes are synchronized only for the current processing window.

The driver suggests using read-only cursors when there is no intent on updating the result set. The forward-only scroll delivers the best performance for small result setsa.

PostgreSQL

By default, the result set is fetched entirely and cached on the client-side. Only the forwardonly and the insensitive scroll are supported. For large result sets, fetching all records at once can put much pressure on both the database server resources and the client-side memory. For this purpose, PostgreSQL allows associating a result set to a database cursora so records can be fetched on demand.

PreparedStatement statement = connection.prepareStatement(

"SELECT title FROM post WHERE id BETWEEN ? AND ?"
);
statement.setFetchSize(100);

Only the forward-only result set type can benefit from database-side cursors, and the statement fetch size must be set to a positive integer value.

ahttps://jdbc.postgresql.org/documentation/head/query.html

MySQL

Only the insensitive scroll type is supported, even when explicitly specifying a forward-only result set. By default, the driver retrieves the whole result set and caches it on the client-side. Large result sets can be streameda if the statement type is both forward-only and read-only and the fetch size value is set to Integer.MIN_VALUE value. This way, when iterating the ResultSet, each row will be fetched individually, which might incur multiple database roundtrips. Also, until the stream is closed, the connection cannot execute any other statement.

PreparedStatement statement = connection.prepareStatement(

"SELECT title FROM post WHERE id BETWEEN ? AND ?"
);
statement.setFetchSize(Integer.MIN_VALUE);

Another option is to set the useCursorFetchb Connection property to true and then set the

Statement fetch size to a positive integer value indicating the number of records that need to be fetched at a time.

statement.setFetchSize(100);

ahttp://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/en/connector-j-reference-implementation-notes.html bhttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/8.0/en/connector-j-reference-implementation-notes.html

5.2 ResultSet changeability

By default, the result set is just a read-only view of the underlying data projection. Inspired by database cursors, the JDBC standard offers updatable result sets, so the data access logic can modify records while iterating the application-level cursor.

Mixing reading and writing logic into a single database transaction reminds of two-tier architectures, where holding the result set, even in the user think time, was both common and acceptable.

For web applications, requests should be as short as possible, and most application-level transactions span over multiple web requests. The former request may use a read-only database transaction to fetch data and render it to the user, while the latter might use a readwrite transaction to apply data modifications. In such scenario, an updatable result set is of little use, especially because holding it open (along with the underlying database connection) over multiple requests can really hurt application scalability.

The following test case verifies if a forward-only and read-only cursor performs better than a sensitive and updatable one. The test executes 10 000 statements, fetching 100 posts along with details and their associated 1000 comments.

Figure 5.1: ResultSet cursor type

Every database system under test showed a slight improvement when using forward-only and read-only result sets.

As a rule of thumb, if the current transaction does not require updating selected records, the forward-only and read-only default result set type might be the most efficient option. Even if it is a reminiscence from JDBC 1.0, the default result set is still the right choice in most situations.

5.3 ResultSet holdability

The JDBC 3.0 version added support for result set holdability and, unlike scrollability and updatability, the default value is implementation-specific.

Oracle

The default and the only supported holdability value is HOLD_CURSORS_OVER_COMMIT. An exception is thrown when trying to change this setting to any other value. SQL Server

By default, the result set is kept open even after the current transaction is committed or rolled back. SQL Server supports the CLOSE_CURSORS_AT_COMMIT setting as well. PostgreSQL

Unlike other database systems, the default holdability value is CLOSE_CURSORS_AT_COMMIT, but the driver also supports the HOLD_CURSORS_OVER_COMMIT setting. MySQL

The default and the only supported holdability value is HOLD_CURSORS_OVER_COMMIT.

In a typical enterprise application, database connections are reused from one transaction to another, so holding a result set after a transaction ends is risky. Depending on the underlying database system and on the cursor type, a result set might allocate system resources, which, for scalability reasons, need to be released as soon as possible.

Although the CLOSE_CURSORS_AT_COMMIT holdability option is not supported by all database engines, the same effect can be achieved by simply closing all acquired ResultSet(s) and their associated Statement objects.

5.4 Fetching size

The JDBC ResultSet acts as an application-level cursor, so whenever the statement is traversed, the result must be transferred from the database to the client. The transfer rate is controlled by the Statement fetch size.

statement.setFetchSize(fetchSize);

A custom fetch size gives the driver a hint as to the number of rows needed to be retrieved in a single database roundtrip. The default value of 0 leaves each database choose its driverspecific fetching policy.

Oracle

The default fetch size is set to 10 records, as a consequence of the JDBC driver memory model.

The Oracle 10i and 11g drivers pre-allocate a byte[] and a char[] buffers at statement creation time, whose lengths are given by the multiplication of the fetch size by the maximum memory footprint of each selected column. A VARCHAR[^2](N) column can accommodate at most N characters (or 2N bytes). Storing a field with a maximum size of 5 characters into a

VARCHAR[^2](4000) column would pre-allocate 8000 bytes on the client-side, which is definitely a waste of memory.

Avoiding memory allocation, by reusing existing buffers, is a very solid reason for employing statement caching. Only when using the implicit statement cache, the 10i and 11g drivers can benefit from recycling client-side memory buffers.

The 12c implementationa defers the buffer allocation until the result set is ready for fetching. This driver version uses two byte[] arrays instead, which are allocated lazily. Compared to the previous versions, the 12c memory footprint is greatly reduced since, instead of allocating the maximum possible data storage, the driver uses the actually extracted data size.

Although the optimal fetch size is application-specific, being influenced by the data size and the runtime environment concurrency topology, the Oracle JDBC driver specification recommends limiting the fetch size to at most 100 records.

Like with any other performance optimization, these indications are suggestions at best, and measuring application performance is the only viable way of finding the right fetch size.

ahttp://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/application-development/jdbc-memory-management-12c-1964666.pdf

SQL Server

The SQL Server JDBC driver uses adaptive bufferinga, so the result set is fetched in batches, as needed. The size of a batch is therefore automatically controlled by the driver.

Although enabled by default, adaptive buffering is limited to forward-only and readonly cursors. Both scrollable and updatable result sets operate on a single block of data, whose length is determined by the current statement fetch size.

ahttps://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb[^879937]%28v=sql.110%29.aspx

PostgreSQL

The entire result set is fetched at oncea into client memory. The default fetch size requires only one database roundtrip, at the price of increasing the driver memory consumption. By changing fetch size, the result set is associated with a database cursor, allowing data to be fetched on demand.

ahttps://jdbc.postgresql.org/documentation/head/query.html

MySQL

Because of the network protocol design considerationa, fetching the whole result set is the most efficient data retrieval strategy. The only streaming option requires processing one row at a time, and the number of database roundtrips is given by the read-ahead buffer configuration.

ahttp://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/en/connector-j-reference-implementation-notes.html

The following graph captures the response time of four database systems when fetching 10 000 rows while varying the fetch size of the forward-only and read-only ResultSet.

Figure 5.2: ResultSet fetch size

Fetching one row at a time requires 10 000 roundtrips, and the networking overhead impacts response time. Up to 100 rows, the fetch size plays an important role in lowering retrieval

time (only 100 roundtrips), but beyond this point, the gain becomes less noticeable.

5.5 ResultSet size

Setting the appropriate fetching size can undoubtedly speed up the result set retrieval, as long as a statement fetches only the data required by the current business logic. All too often, unfortunately, especially with the widespread of ORM tools, the statement might select more data than necessary. This issue might be caused by selecting too many rows or too many columns, which are later discarded in the data access or the business layer.

5.5.1 Too many rows

Tables tend to grow (especially if the application gains more traction), and, with time, a moderate result set might easily turn into a performance bottleneck. These issues are often discovered in production systems, long after the application code was shipped.

A user interface can accommodate just as much info as the view allows displaying. For this reason, it is inefficient to fetch a whole result set if it cannot fit into the user interface. Pagination or dynamic scrolling are common ways of addressing this issue, and partitioning data sets becomes unavoidable.

Limiting result sets is common in batch processing as well. To avoid long-running transactions (which might put pressure on the database undo/redo logs), and to also benefit from parallel execution, a batch processor divides the current workload into smaller jobs. This way, a batch job can take only a subset of the whole processing data.

When the result set size is limited by external factors, it makes no sense to select more data than necessary.

Without placing upper bounds, the result sets grow proportionally with the underlying table data. A large result set requires more time to be extracted and to be sent over the wire too.

Limiting queries can, therefore, ensure predictable response times and database resource utilization. The shorter the query processing time, the quicker the row-level locks are released, and the more scalable the data access layer becomes.

There are basically two ways of limiting a result set.

The former and the most efficient strategy is to include the row restriction clause in the SQL statement. This way, the Optimizer can better come up with an execution plan that is optimal for the current result set size (like selecting an index scan instead of a table scan).

The latter is to configure a maximum row count at the JDBC Statement level. Ideally, the driver can adjust the statement to include the equivalent result set size restriction as a SQL clause, but, most often, it only hints the database engine to use a database cursor instead.

5.5.1.1 SQL limit clause

SQL:2008

Although the SQL:2008 added support for limiting result sets, only starting from Oracle 12ca, SQL Server 2012b and PostgreSQL 8.4c, the standard syntax started being supported.

SELECT pc.id AS pc_id, p.title AS p_title
FROM post_comment pc
INNER JOIN post p ON p.id = pc.post_id
ORDER BY pc_id
OFFSET ? ROWS
FETCH FIRST (?) ROWS ONLY

Surrounding the row count placeholder with parentheses is a workaround for a PostgreSQL database issued. On SQL Server it works with or without the enclosing parentheses.

Older database versions or other database systems (e.g. MySQL 5.7) still rely on a vendorspecific syntax to restrict the result set size.

ahttps://docs.oracle.com/database/121/SQLRF/statements_10002.htm#SQLRF[^01702] bhttps://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/gg[^699618]%28v=sql.110%29.aspx chttp://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/sql-select.html#SQL-LIMIT

Oracle

Unlike other relational databases, Oracle does not have a reserved keyword for restricting a query result set, but because each record is attributed a result set entry order number (given by the ROWNUM virtual column), the syntax for limiting a result set becomes:

SELECT *
FROM (

SELECT pc.id AS pc_id, p.title AS p_title
FROM post_comment pc
INNER JOIN post p ON p.id = pc.post_id
ORDER BY pc_id
)
WHERE ROWNUM <= ?

SQL Server

The TOP keyword has been the de facto way of restricting the result set size:

SELECT TOP (?) pc.id AS pc_id, p.title AS p_title
FROM post_comment pc
INNER JOIN post p ON p.id = pc.post_id
ORDER BY pc_id

PostgreSQL and MySQL

The LIMIT keyword places an upper bound on the result set size:

SELECT pc.id AS pc_id, p.title AS p_title
FROM post_comment pc
INNER JOIN post p ON p.id = pc.post_id
ORDER BY pc_id
LIMIT ?

5.5.1.2 JDBC max rows

The JDBC specification defines the maxRows[^1] attribute which limits all ResultSet(s) for the current statement.

statement.setMaxRows(maxRows);

Unlike the SQL construct, the JDBC alternative is portable across all driver implementations. This can be very handy especially when the application needs to support multiple database systems.

According to the JDBC documentation, the driver is expected to discard the extra rows when the maximum threshold is reached.

From a data access performance perspective, dropping extra rows is a poor strategy because it wastes both database resources (CPU, I/O, Memory) as well as networking bandwidth.

[^1]: <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/sql/Statement.html#setMaxRows-int->

Oracle

When a ResultSet is being traversed, the client-side cursor fetches data in chunks (the fetch size attribute controlling the number of records in a chunk).

After each new batch retrieval, the total number of records is checked against the maxRows upper bound, and if the threshold is reached, the driver closes the networking stream.

The maxRows upper bound can, therefore, prevent the database and the client-side driver from wasting resources on fetching records the client does not even need. However, if the maxRows value is small, the Optimizer will not use indexes if the size of the scanned data set is rather large.

SQL Server

When the Statement.setMaxRows(int maxRows)a method is called, the driver calls the SET ROWCOUNT SQL command:

SET ROWCOUNT N

Unlike the TOP or FETCH SQL directives, the ROWCOUNT command is taken into consideration only during the execution phase, and it does not influence the plan generation. Because of this, the execution plan might not be optimized for the given result set size, so a table scan might be chosen over an index.

The SQL Server documentationb recommends using the SQL directives over the SET

ROWCOUNT command.

ahttps://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms[^378838]%28v=sql.110%29.aspx

PostgreSQL

The JDBC driver takes the maxRows statement attribute and sends it along with the query being executed. With this info, the Optimizer can choose an execution plan that is tailored for the given result set size, and it might even avoid some expensive operations like sorting the whole projection. The Extractor can also close the database cursor right after it fetched the desired number of records, therefore sparing both database and networking resources.

MySQL

The maxRows attribute is not sent to the database server, so neither the Optimizer nor the Extractor can benefit from this hint. While the JDBC driver would normally fetch all rows, by placing an upper bound on the result set size, the client-side can spare some networking overhead.

5.5.1.3 Less is more

The following test is going to demonstrate the performance improvement of limiting the result set size. The test data set consists of 100 000 post and 1 000 000 comment entries. In the first round, the entire result set is being fetched, and the response time is going to be proportional to the projection size. By limiting the result set to 100 records, either by using SQL or the JDBC maxSize setting, the response time is going to drop significantly.

Figure 5.3: ResultSet size

The test results confirm the previous assumptions and the SQL level restriction proves to be the optimal strategy for limiting a result set. The maxRows driver implementation yields a surprisingly good result, especially when taking into consideration the JDBC specification on dropping extra records. Fetching a large result set puts much pressure on database resources, which does not only affect the current processing unit of work. Other concurrent transactions can also exhibit longer processing times, as a consequence of database resources shortage.

5.5.2 Too many columns

Not only fetching too many rows can cause performance issues but even extracting too many columns can increase the result set processing response time. The next test case is going to select 100 posts with details and their associated 1000 comments, using one of following two statements:

SELECT *
FROM post_comment pc
INNER JOIN post p ON p.id = pc.post_id
INNER JOIN post_details pd ON p.id = pd.id

SELECT pc.version
FROM post_comment pc
INNER JOIN post p ON p.id = pc.post_id
INNER JOIN post_details pd ON p.id = pd.id

The following graph depicts the execution times of fetching all columns, as opposed to extracting only a subset of the whole column projection.

Figure 5.4: ResultSet projection size

This situation is more prevalent among ORM tools, as for populating entities entirely, all columns are needed to be selected. This might pass unnoticed when selecting just a few entities, but, for large result sets, this can turn into a noticeable performance issue.

If a business case requires only a subset of all entity attributes, fetching extra columns will become a waste of database and application resources (CPU, Memory, I/O, Networking).

6. Transactions

A database system must allow concurrent access to the underlying data. However, shared data means that read and write operations must be synchronized to ensure that data integrity is not compromised.

To control concurrent modifications, the Java programming language defines the synchronized keyword for two purposes:

It can restrict access to a shared Object (to preserve invariants), so only a Thread can execute a routine at any given time.

It propagates changes from the current Thread local memory to the global memory that is available to all running threads of executions.

This behavior is typical for other concurrent programming environments and database systems are no different. In a relational database, the mechanism for ensuring data integrity is implemented on top of transactions.

A transaction is a collection of read and write operations that can either succeed or fail together, as a unit. All database statements must execute within a transactional context, even when the database client does not explicitly define its boundaries.

In 1981, Jim Gray first defined the properties of a database transaction in his famous paper: The transaction concept: virtues and limitations[^1]. Both this paper and the first versions of the SQL standard (SQL-86 and SQL-89) only used three properties for defining a database transaction: Atomicity, Consistency, and Durability.

Along with other relation database topics, the transaction research has continued ever since, and so the SQL-92 version introduced the concept of Isolation Levels. These four properties have been assembled in the well-known ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability) acronym that soon became synonym with relation database transactions.

Knowing how database transactions work is very important for two main reasons:

effective data access (data integrity should not be compromised when aiming for highperformance)

efficient data access (reducing contention can minimize transaction response time which, in turn, increases throughput).

The next sections detail each transaction property in relation to high-performance data processing.

[^1]: <http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/papers/theTransactionConcept.pdf>

6.1 Atomicity

Atomicity is the property of grouping multiple operations into an all-or-nothing unit of work, which can succeed only if all individual operations succeed. For this reason, the database must be able to roll back all actions associated with every executed statement.

Figure 6.1: Atomic units of work

Write-write conflicts

Ideally, every transaction would have a completely isolated branch which could be easily discarded in case of a rollback. This scenario would be similar to how a Version Control System (e.g. git) implements branching. In case of conflicts, the Virtual Control System aborts the commit operation, and the client has to manually resolve the conflict. Unlike VCS tools, the relational database engine must manage conflicts without any human intervention.

For this reason, the database prevents write-write conflict situations, and only one transaction can write a record at any given time.

All statements are executed against the actual data structures (tables, indexes, in-memory buffers), only to be materialized at commit time. In case of rollback, the database must revert any pending changed datum to its previous state.

Oracle

The undo tablespacea stores the previous data versions in undo segments. Upon rolling back, the database engine searches the associated undo segments that can recreate the before image of every datum that was changed by the currently running transaction.

ahttps://docs.oracle.com/database/121/ADMIN/undo.htm#ADMIN[^11460]

SQL Server

The transaction loga stores details about the currently running transactions and their associated modifications. The rollback process scans the transaction log backward to find the associated undo records. When the record is found, the database engine restores the before image of the affected datum.

To prevent the transaction log from filling up, the log must be truncated on a regular basis. Long-running transactions can delay the truncation process, so that is another reason to avoid them as much as possible.

ahttps://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms[^190925].aspx

PostgreSQL

Unlike other database systems, PostgreSQL does not use a dedicated append-only undo log. Because of its multi-version nature, every database object maintains its own version history. In the absence of the log seek-up phase, the rollback process becomes much lighter as it only requires to switch from one version to the other.

The downside is that the previous version space is limited in size, and so it must be reused. The process of reclaiming the storage occupied by old versions is called VACUUMING.

Each transaction has an associated XIDa, and newer transactions must have a greater XID number than all previous ones.

The transaction XID is a 32-bit number so it can accommodate over 4 billion transactions. In a high-performance application, the transaction lifespan is very short, and if the VACUUM process is disabled, this threshold may be reached. When the XID counter reaches its maximum value, it wraps around and start again from zero.

The transactions issued prior to the XID wraparound have their identifiers greater than newer transactions started after the XID counter reset. This anomaly can cause the system to perceive older transactions as they were started in the future, which can lead to very serious data integrity issues.

ahttp://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/routine-vacuuming.html

MySQL

The undo log is stored in the rollback segmenta of the system tablespace.

Each undo log is split into two sections, one responsible for rolling back purposes and the other for reconstructing the before image. The first section can be wiped out right after the transaction is ended, while the other needs to linger for as long as any currently running query or other concurrent transactions need to see a previous version of the records in question.

Behind the scenes, MySQL runs a purge process that cleans up the storage occupied by deleted records, and it also reclaims the undo log segments that are no longer required.

Long-running transactions delay the purge process execution, causing the undo log to grow very large, especially in write-heavy data access scenarios.

ahttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/innodb-multi-versioning.html

6.2 Consistency

A modifying transaction can be seen as a state transformation, moving the database from one valid state to another. The relational database schema ensures that all primary modifications (insert/update/delete statements), as well as secondary ones (issued by triggers), obey certain rules on the underlying data structures:

column types

column length

column nullability

foreign key constraints

unique key constraints

custom check constraints.

Consistency is about validating the transaction state change so that all committed transactions leave the database in a proper state. If only one constraint gets violated, the entire transaction will be rolled back, and all modifications are going to be reverted.

Although the application must validate user input prior to crafting database statements, the application-level checks cannot span over other concurrent requests, possibly coming from different web servers. When the database is the primary integration point, the advantages of a strict schema become even more apparent.

MySQL

Traditionally, MySQL constraints are not strictly enforceda, and the database engine replaces invalid values with predefined defaults:

Out-of-range numeric values are set to either 0 or the maximum possible value.

String values are trimmed to the maximum length.

Incorrect Date/Time values are permitted (e.g. 2015-02-30).

NOT NULL constraints are only enforced for single INSERT statements. For multi-row inserts, 0 replaces a null numeric value, and '' is used for a null String.

Since the 5.0.2 version, strict constraints are possible if the database engine is configured to use a custom sql modeb:

SET GLOBAL sql_mode='POSTGRESQL,STRICT_ALL_TABLES';

Because the sql_mode resets on server startup, it is better to set it up in the MySQL configuration file:

[mysqld] sql_mode = POSTGRESQL,STRICT_ALL_TABLES

ahttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/constraint-invalid-data.html bhttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/sql-mode.html

Consistency as in CAP Theorem

According to the CAP theorema, when a distributed system encounters a network partition, the system must choose either Consistency (all changes are instantaneously applied to all nodes) or Availability (any node can accept a request), but not both. While in the definition of ACID, consistency is about obeying constraints, in the CAP theorem context, consistency refers to linearizabilityb, which is an isolation guarantee instead.

ahttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem bhttp://www.bailis.org/blog/linearizability-versus-serializability/

6.3 Isolation

If there were only one user accessing the database, there would not be any risk of data conflicts. According to the Universal Scalability Law, if the sequential fraction of the data access patterns is less than 100%, the database system may benefit from parallelization.

By offering multiple concurrent connections, the transaction throughput can increase, and the database system can accommodate more traffic. However, parallelization imposes additional challenges as the database must interleave transactions in such a way that conflicts do not compromise data integrity. The execution order of all the currently running transaction operations is said to be serializable when its outcome is the same as if the underlying transactions were executed one after the other.

The serializable execution is, therefore, the only transaction isolation level that does not compromise data integrity while allowing a certain degree of parallelization. In 1981, Jim Gray described the largest airlines and banks as having 10 000 terminals and 100 active transactions, which explains why, up until SQL-92, serializable was the de facto transaction isolation level.

6.3.1 Concurrency control

To manage data conflicts, several concurrency control mechanisms have been developed throughout the years. There are two strategies for handling data collisions:

Avoiding conflicts (e.g. two-phase locking) requires locking to control access to shared resources.

Detecting conflicts (e.g. Multi-Version Concurrency Control) provides better concurrency, at the price of relaxing serializability and possibly accepting various data anomalies.

6.3.1.1 Two-phase locking

In 1976, Kapali Eswaran and Jim Gray (et al.) published The Notions of Consistency and Predicate Locks in a Database System[^2] paper, which demonstrated that serializability could be obtained if all transactions used the two-phase locking (2PL) protocol.

Initially, all database systems employed 2PL for implementing serializable transactions, but, with time, many vendors have moved towards an MVCC (Multi-Version Concurrency Control) architecture. By default, SQL Server still uses locking for implementing the Serializability isolation level.

Because 2PL guarantees transaction serializability, it is very important to understand the price of maintaining strict data integrity on the overall application scalability and transaction performance.

[^2]: <http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/papers/On%20the%20Notions%20of%20Consistency%20and%>

20Predicate%20Locks%20in%20a%20Database%20System%20CACM.pdf

However, locking is not used only in 2PL implementations, and, to address both DML and DDL statement interaction and to minimize contention on shared resources, relational database systems use Multiple granularity locking[^3].

Database objects are hierarchical in nature, a logical tablespace being mapped to multiple database files, which are built of data pages, each page containing multiple rows. For this reason, locks can be acquired on different database object types.

Locking on lower levels (e.g. rows) can offer better concurrency as it reduces the likelihood of contention. Because each lock takes resources, holding multiple lower-level locks can add up, so the database might decide to substitute multiple lower-level locks into a single upperlevel one. This process is called lock escalation, and it trades off concurrency for database resources.

Each database system comes with its own lock hierarchy, but the most common types (even mentioned by the 2PL initial paper) remain the following ones:

shared (read) lock, preventing a record from being written while allowing reads

exclusive (write) lock, disallowing both read and write operations.

Locks alone are not sufficient for preventing conflicts. A concurrency control strategy must define how locks are being acquired and released because this also has an impact on transaction interleaving.

For this purpose, the 2PL protocol defines a lock management strategy for ensuring serializability. The 2PL protocol splits a transaction into two sections:

expanding phase (locks are acquired, and no lock is released)

shrinking phase (all locks are released, and no other lock is further acquired).

In lock-based concurrency control, all transactions must follow the 2PL protocol, as otherwise serializability might be compromised, resulting in data anomalies.

Transaction schedule

To provide recovery from failures, the transaction schedule (the sequence of all interleaved operations) must be strict. If a write operation, in a first transaction, happens-before a conflict occurring in a subsequent transaction, in order to achieve transaction strictness, the first transaction commit event must also happen before the conflict.

Because operations are properly ordered, strictness can prevent cascading aborts (one transaction rollback triggering a chain of other transaction aborts, to preserve data consistency). Releasing all locks only after the transaction has ended (either commit or rollback) is a requirement for having a strict schedule.

[^3]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_granularity_locking>

The following diagram shows how transaction interleaving is coordinated by 2PL:

Figure 6.2: Two-phase locking

Both Alice and Bob select a post record, both acquiring a shared lock on this record.

When Bob attempts to update the post entry, his statement is blocked by the Lock Manager because Alice is still holding a shared lock on this database row.

Only after Alice’s transaction ends and all locks are being released, Bob can resume his update operation.

Bob’s update generates a lock upgrade, so the shared lock is replaced by an exclusive lock, which prevents any other concurrent read or write operation.

Alice starts a new transaction and issues a select query for the same post entry, but the statement is blocked by the Lock Manager since Bob owns an exclusive lock on this record.

After Bob’s transaction is committed, all locks are released, and Alice’s query can be resumed, so she gets the latest value of this database record.

Deadlocks

Using locking for controlling access to shared resources is prone to deadlocks, and the transaction scheduler alone cannot prevent their occurrences.

A deadlock happens when two concurrent transactions cannot make progress because each one waits for the other to release a lock. Because both transactions are in the lock acquisition phase, neither one releases a lock prior to acquiring the next one.

Figure 6.3: Dead lock

Preserving the lock order becomes the responsibility of the data access layer, and the database can only assist in recovering from a deadlock situation.

The database engine runs a separate process that scans the current conflict graph for lockwait cycles (which are caused by deadlocks). When a cycle is detected, the database engine picks one transaction and aborts it, causing its locks to be released, so the other transaction can make progress.

6.3.1.2 Multi-Version Concurrency Control

Although locking can provide a serializable transaction schedule, the cost of lock contention can undermine both transaction response time and scalability. The response time can increase because transactions must wait for locks to be released, and long-running transactions can slow down the progress of other concurrent transactions as well. According to both Amdahl’s Law and the Universal Scalability Law, concurrency is also affected by contention.

To address these shortcomings, the database vendors have opted for optimistic concurrency control mechanisms. If 2PL prevents conflicts, Multi-Version Concurrency Control (MVCC) uses a conflict detection strategy instead.

The promise of MVCC is that readers do not block writers and writers do not block readers. The only source of contention comes from writers blocking other concurrent writers, which otherwise would compromise transaction rollback and atomicity.

To prevent blocking, the database can rebuild previous versions of a database record so an uncommitted change can be hidden away from incoming concurrent readers. The lack of locking makes it more difficult to implement a serializable schedule, so the database engine must analyze the current interleaving operations and detect anomalies that would compromise serializability.

Oracle

Oracle does not implement 2PL at all, relying on MVCC mechanism for managing concurrent data access. Every query gets a point-in-time data snapshot and, depending on the isolation level, the timestamp reference can be relative to the current statement or to the current transaction start time.

To rebuild previous record versions, Oracle uses the undo segmentsa, which already contain all the necessary data required for rolling back an uncommitted change. The point-in-time is based on the System Change Number (SCN), which is a logical timestamp reference and, unlike physical time, is guaranteed to be incremented monotonically.

Apart from MVCC, Oracle also supports explicit locking as well, using the SELECT FOR UPDATE SQL syntax.

ahttps://docs.oracle.com/database/121/CNCPT/consist.htm#CNCPT[^221]

SQL Server

By default, SQL Server uses locks for implementing all the isolation levels stipulated by the SQL standard.

For the Read Committed isolation level to take advantage of the MVCC model, the following configuration must be set first:

ALTER DATABASE high_performance_java_persistence
SET READ_COMMITTED_SNAPSHOT ON;

For a higher-level isolation, SQL Server offers the Snapshot isolation mode, which must be activated at the database level:

ALTER DATABASE high_performance_java_persistence
SET ALLOW_SNAPSHOT_ISOLATION ON;

Because Snapshot is a custom isolation level, it must also be set at the connection level prior to starting a new transaction:

SET TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL SNAPSHOT;
GO
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
GO
COMMIT TRANSACTION;
GO

After enabling row versioning, the database can track record changes in the tempdb database.

When a row is either updated or deleted, the current row entry holds a reference back to the previous version, which is recorded in the version store, in the tempdb database. Rows are not deleted right away but only marked for deletion, the actual removal being done by the Ghost cleanup task. Old versions must be kept for as long as a currently running transaction might need them, which is specified by the transaction isolation level.

The Ghost cleanup task runs periodically and reclaims storage from old versions that are no longer necessary.

A long-running transaction would require the database engine to keep some old version for a very long time, and, because version changes are chained in a linked list structure, restoring a very old version might becomes resource intensive.

PostgreSQL

Unlike all other database systems, PostgreSQL stores both the current rows and their previous versions (even the ones for the aborted transactions) in the actual database table. Like Oracle, PostgreSQL embraces the MVCC data access model, and it does not offer a 2PL transaction isolation implementation at all.

Each table row has two additional columns (xmin and xmax), which are used to control the visibility of various row versions. When a row is inserted, the current transaction identifier is stored in the xmin column.

Both the update and the delete operations end up creating a new row entry with a xmax column storing the current transaction identifier.

The Vacuum cleaner process runs regularly and reclaims storage occupied by deleted entries (and successfully committed) or by previous versions that are no longer required by the currently running transactions.

Although PostgreSQL is seen as a pure MVCC model, locking is still required to prevent writewrite conflicts or for explicit lockinga. SELECT FOR UPDATE is used to acquire an exclusive rowlevel lock, while SELECT FOR SHARE is for applying a shared lock instead.

ahttp://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/explicit-locking.html

MySQL

The InnoDB storage engine offers support for ACID transactions and uses MVCC for controlling access to shared resources. The InnoDB MVCC implementation is very similar to Oracle, and previous versions of database rows are stored in the rollback segment as well.

When a transaction demands a previous row version, MySQL must reconstruct it from rollback segments. Delete operations just mark an entry as being ready for deletion, and the purge thread is going to do the actual physical cleanup.

Both the transaction rollback and the previous row version restoring processes (required by a given transaction visibility guarantees) are very much the same thing.

Like other database systems, MySQL also offers explicit lockinga for when MVCC is no longer satisfactory. A shared lock is acquired using SELECT LOCK IN SHARE MODE, while, for exclusive locks, the much more common SELECT FOR UPDATE syntax is being used.

ahttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/innodb-locking-reads.html

6.3.2 Phenomena

For reasonable transaction throughput values, it makes sense to imply transaction serializability. As the incoming traffic grows, the price for strict data integrity becomes too high, and this is the primary reason for having multiple isolation levels. Relaxing serializability guarantees may generate data integrity anomalies, which are also referred as phenomena.

The SQL-92 standard introduced three phenomena that can occur when moving away from a serializable transaction schedule:

dirty read

non-repeatable read

phantom read.

In reality, there are other phenomena that can occur due to transaction interleaving, as the famous paper A Critique of ANSI SQL Isolation Levels[^4] describes:

dirty write

read skew

write skew

lost update.

Choosing a certain isolation level is a trade-off between increasing concurrency and acknowledging the possible anomalies that might occur.

Scalability is undermined by contention and coherency costs. The lower the isolation level, the less locking (or multi-version transaction abortions), and the more scalable the application gets.

However, a lower isolation level allows more phenomena, and the data integrity responsibility is shifted from the database side to the application logic, which must ensure that it takes all measures to prevent or mitigate any such data anomaly.

Before jumping to isolation levels, it is better to understand what’s behind each particular phenomenon and how it can affect data integrity. When choosing a given transaction isolation level, understanding phenomena becomes fundamental to taking the right decision,

[^4]: <http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=69541>

6.3.2.1 Dirty write

A dirty write happens when two concurrent transactions are allowed to modify the same row at the same time. As previously mentioned, all changes are applied to the actual database object structures, which means that the second transaction simply overwrites the first transaction pending change.

Figure 6.4: Dirty write

If the two transactions commit, one transaction will silently overwrite the other transaction, causing a lost update. Another problem arises when the first transaction wants to roll back. The database engine would have to choose one of the following action paths:

It can restore the row to its previous version (as it was before the first transaction changed it), but then it overwrites the second transaction uncommitted change.

It can acknowledge the existence of a newer version (issued by the second transaction), but then, if the second transaction has to roll back, its previous version will become the uncommitted change of the first transaction.

If the database engine did not prevent dirty writes, guaranteeing rollbacks would not be possible. Because atomicity cannot be implemented in the absence of reliable rollbacks, all database systems must, therefore, prevent dirty writes.

Although the SQL standard does not mention this phenomenon, even the lowest isolation level (Read Uncommitted) can prevent it.

6.3.2.2 Dirty read

As previously mentioned, all database changes are applied to the actual data structures (memory buffers, data blocks, indexes). A dirty read happens when a transaction is allowed to read the uncommitted changes of some other concurrent transaction. Taking a business decision on a value that has not been committed is risky because uncommitted changes might get rolled back.

Figure 6.5: Dirty read

This anomaly is only permitted by the Read Uncommitted isolation level, and, because of the serious impact on data integrity, most database systems offer a higher default isolation level.

To prevent dirty reads, the database engine must hide uncommitted changes from all other concurrent transactions. Each transaction is allowed to see its own changes because otherwise the read-your-own-writes consistency guarantee is compromised.

If the underlying database uses 2PL (Two-Phase Locking), the uncommitted rows are protected by write locks which prevent other concurrent transactions from reading these records until they are committed.

When the underlying database uses MVCC (Multi-Version Concurrency Control), the database engine can use the undo log which already captures the previous version of every uncommitted record, to restore the previous value in other concurrent transaction queries. Most database systems optimize the before image restoring process, therefore lowering its overhead on the overall application performance.

Read Uncommitted is rarely needed (non-strict reporting queries where dirty reads are acceptable), so Read Committed is usually the lowest practical isolation level.

6.3.2.3 Non-repeatable read

If one transaction reads a database row without applying a shared lock on the newly fetched record, then a concurrent transaction might change this row before the first transaction has ended.

Figure 6.6: Non-repeatable read

This phenomenon is problematic when the current transaction makes a business decision based on the first value of the given database row (a client might order a product based on a stock quantity value that is no longer a positive integer).

Most database systems have moved to a Multi-Version Concurrency Control model, and shared locks are no longer mandatory for preventing non-repeatable reads. By verifying the current row version, a transaction can be aborted if a previously fetched record has changed in the meanwhile.

Repeatable Read and Serializable prevent this anomaly by default. With Read Committed, it is possible to avoid non-repeatable (fuzzy) reads if the shared locks are acquired explicitly (e.g.

SELECT FOR SHARE).

Some ORM frameworks (e.g. JPA/Hibernate) offer application-level repeatable reads. The first snapshot of any retrieved entity is cached in the currently running Persistence Context. Any successive query returning the same database row is going to use the very same object that was previously cached. This way, the fuzzy reads may be prevented even in Read Committed isolation level.

6.3.2.4 Phantom read

If a transaction makes a business decision based on a set of rows satisfying a given predicate, without range locks, a concurrent transaction might insert a record matching that particular predicate.

Figure 6.7: Phantom read

The SQL standard says that Phantom Read occurs if two consecutive query executions render different results because a concurrent transaction has modified the range of records in between the two calls. Although providing consistent reads is a mandatory requirement for serializability, that is not sufficient. For instance, one buyer might purchase a product without being aware of a better offer that was added right after the user has finished fetching the offer list.

The 2PL-based Serializable isolation prevents Phantom Reads through the use of predicate locking. On the other hand, MVCC database engines address the Phantom Read anomaly by returning consistent snapshots. However, a concurrent transaction can still modify the range of records that was read previously. Even if the MVCC database engine introspects the transaction schedule, the outcome is not always the same as a 2PL-based implementation. One such example is when the second transaction issues an insert without reading the same range of records as the first transaction. In this particular use case, some MVCC database engines will not end up rolling back the first transaction.

6.3.2.5 Read skew

Read skew is a lesser known anomaly that involves a constraint on more than one database tables. In the following example, the application requires the post and the post_details be updated in sync. Whenever a post record changes, its associated post_details must register the user who made the current modification.

Figure 6.8: Read skew

In between selecting the post and the post_details rows, a second transaction sneaks in and manages to update both records. The first transaction sees an older version of the post row and the latest version of the associated post_details. Because of this read skew, the first transaction assumes that this particular post was updated by Bob, although, in fact, it is an older version updated by Alice.

Like with non-repeatable reads, there are two ways to avoid this phenomenon:

The first transaction can acquire shared locks on every read, therefore preventing the second transaction from updating these records.

The first transaction can be aborted upon validating the commit constraints (when using an MVCC implementation of the Repeatable Read or Serializable isolation levels).

6.3.2.6 Write skew

Like read skew, this phenomenon involves disjoint writes over two different tables that are constrained to be updated as a unit. Whenever the post row changes, the client must update the post_details with the user making the change.

Figure 6.9: Write skew

Both Alice and Bob selects the post and its associated post_details record. If write skew is allowed, Alice and Bob can update these two records separately, therefore breaking the constraint.

Like with non-repeatable reads, there are two ways to avoid this phenomenon:

The first transaction can acquire shared locks on both entries, therefore preventing the second transaction from updating these records.

The database engine can detect that another transaction has changed these records, and so it can force the first transaction to roll back (under an MVCC implementation of Repeatable Read or Serializable).

6.3.2.7 Lost update

This phenomenon happens when a transaction reads a row while another transaction modifies it prior to the first transaction to finish. In the following example, Bob’s update is silently overwritten by Alice, who is not aware of the record update.

Figure 6.10: Lost update

This anomaly can have serious consequences on data integrity (a buyer might purchase a product without knowing the price has just changed), especially because it affects Read Committed, the default isolation level in many database systems.

Traditionally, Repeatable Read protected against lost updates since the shared locks could prevent a concurrent transaction from modifying an already fetched record. With MVCC, the second transaction is allowed to make the change, while the first transaction is aborted when the database engine detects the row version mismatch (during the first transaction commit).

Most ORM tools, such as Hibernate, offer application-level optimistic locking, which automatically integrates the row version whenever a record modification is issued. On a row version mismatch, the update count is going to be zero, so the application can roll back the current transaction, as the current data snapshot is stale.

6.3.3 Isolation levels

As previously stated, Serializable is the only isolation level to provide a truly ACID transaction interleaving. However, serializability comes at a price as locking introduces contention, which, in turn, limits concurrency and scalability. Even in multi-version concurrency models, serializability may require aborting too many transactions that are affected by phenomena.

For this purpose, the SQL-92 version introduced multiple isolation levels, and the database client has the option of balancing concurrency against data correctness. Each isolation level is defined in terms of the minimum number of phenomena that it must prevent, and so the SQL standard introduces the following transaction isolation levels:

Table 6.1: Standard isolation levels

Isolation Level Dirty read Non-repeatable read Phantom read Read Uncommitted Yes Yes Yes Read Committed No Yes Yes Repeatable Read No No Yes Serializable No No No

Without an explicit setting, the JDBC driver uses the default isolation level, which can be introspected using the getDefaultTransactionIsolation()[^5] method of the DatabaseMetaData object:

int level = connection.getMetaData().getDefaultTransactionIsolation();

The default isolation level can be changed using the setTransactionIsolation(int level)[^6] Con-

nection method.

connection.setTransactionIsolation(Connection.TRANSACTION_SERIALIZABLE);

Even if ACID properties imply a serializable schedule, most relational database systems use a lower default isolation level instead:

Read Committed (Oracle, SQL Server, PostgreSQL)

Repeatable Read (MySQL).

The following sections go through each particular transaction isolation level and demonstrate the actual list of phenomena that are prevented by a given database system.

[^5]: <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/sql/DatabaseMetaData.html#getDefaultTransactionIsolation-->

[^6]: <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/sql/Connection.html#setTransactionIsolation-int->

6.3.3.1 Read Uncommitted

Table 6.2: Read Uncommitted phenomena occurrence

Phenomena SQL Server PostgreSQL MySQL Dirty Write No No No Dirty Read Yes No Yes Non-Repeatable Read Yes Yes Yes Phantom Read Yes Yes Yes Read Skew Yes Yes Yes Write Skew Yes Yes Yes Lost Update Yes Yes Yes

Oracle

Dirty reads are not allowed, and so the lowest isolation level is Read Committed.

The JDBC driver will even throw an exception if the client tries to set the Read Uncommitted isolation on the current Connection.

SQL Server

Read Uncommitted only protects against dirty writes, all other phenomena being allowed. When using Read Uncommitted, there is no exclusive lock associated with a given SQL modification, so uncommitted changes are available to other concurrent transactions even before they get committed. If the risk of dirty reads can be assumed, avoiding exclusive locks may speed up reporting queries, especially when scanning large amounts of data.

For lock-based concurrency control mechanisms, Read Uncommitted is worth considering if the risk of dirty reads is a much smaller issue than locking a large portion of a database table. Because MVCC avoids reader-writer and writer-reader locking, it might not exhibit a considerable performance enhancement from permitting dirty reads.

PostgreSQL

Like Oracle, PostgreSQL does not allow dirty reads, the lowest isolation level being Read Committed.

When choosing Read Uncommitted, the JDBC driver silently falls back to Read Committed.

MySQL

Although it uses MVCC, InnoDB implements Read Uncommitted so that dirty reads are permitted. As an optimization, each query is spared from rebuilding the previously committed versions (using the rollback segments) of the currently scanned records (in case they have been recently modified).

6.3.3.2 Read Committed

Read Committed is one of the most common isolation levels, and it behaves consistently across multiple relational database systems or various concurrency control models.

Many database systems choose Read Committed as the default isolation level because it delivers the best performance while preventing fatal anomalies such as dirty writes and dirty reads. However, performance has its price as Read Committed permits many anomalies that might lead to data corruption.

Table 6.3: Read Committed phenomena occurrence

Phenomena Oracle SQL Server SQL Server MVCC PostgreSQL MySQL Dirty Write No No No No No Dirty Read No No No No No Non-Repeatable Read Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Phantom Read Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Read Skew Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Write Skew Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Lost Update Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

Oracle

Every statement has a start timestamp, which is used to create a database snapshot relative to this particular point-in-time. This way, writers can still update the currently selected records, and the database can simply reconstruct the previous versions that were available when the query started. Subsequent query executions can return different row versions, so non-repeatable reads are permitted.

When two transactions attempt to update the same record, the first one locks the record to prevent dirty writes. The second transaction must wait until the first transaction releases the lock (either commit or rollback), and the statement filtering criteria are reevaluated against latest data.

PostgreSQL

Like Oracle, every query sees a database snapshot as of the beginning of the currently running query. Because shared locks are not used to protect previously read records from being modified, Read Committed allows a large spectrum of data anomalies.

Exclusive locks prevent write-write conflicts, so when two transactions update the same record, the second one waits for the first transaction to release its locks. When the second transaction resumes its execution, if the filtering criteria are still relevant, it might overwrite the first transaction modifications, therefore causing lost updates.

MySQL

Query-time snapshots are used to isolate statements from other concurrent transactions. When explicitly acquiring shared or exclusive locks or when issuing update or delete statements (which acquire exclusive locks to prevent dirty writes), if the selected rows are filtered by unique search criteria (e.g. primary key), the locks can be applied to the associated index entries.

Prior to 5.7a, if the modifying statements used a range filter and the search criteria took advantage of a unique index scan, then the database could use a gap or a next-key lock (therefore protecting against phantom reads as well). Statement-based replication is not available for Read Committed, so the application must use the row-based binary logging instead.

ahttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/set-transaction.html#idm[^140311316367072]

SQL Server

By default, SQL statements use shared locks to prevent other transactions from modifying the currently fetched records. The locks are released by the time the query finishes executing. When activating Read Committed Snapshot Isolation, the database does not use shared locks anymore, and each query selects the row version as it was when the query started.

6.3.3.3 Repeatable Read

One of the least compliant isolation levels, Repeatable Read implementation details leak into its phenomena prevention spectrum:

Table 6.4: Repeatable Read phenomena occurrence

Phenomena SQL Server PostgreSQL MySQL Dirty Write No No No Dirty Read No No No Non-Repeatable Read No No No Phantom Read Yes No No Read Skew No No No Write Skew No Yes Yes Lost Update No No Yes

Oracle

The Repeatable Read isolation is not supported at all, and the JDBC driver will throw an exception if the client tries to set it explicitly.

SQL Server

For every row the client reads, the current transaction acquires a shared lock that prevents any other transaction from concurrently modifying it. The shared locks are released when the transaction either commits or rolls back.

PostgreSQL

The Repeatable Read is implemented using Snapshot Isolationa, so not only fuzzy reads are prevented, but even phantom reads are prohibited as well. Instead of using locking, the PostgreSQL MVCC implementation allows conflicts to occur, but it aborts any transaction whose guarantees do not hold anymore.

ahttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snapshot_isolation

MySQL

Every transaction can only see rows as if they were when the current transaction started. This prevents non-repeatable reads, but it still allows lost updates and write skews.

6.3.3.4 Serializable

Serializable is supposed to provide a transaction schedule, whose outcome, even in spite of statement interleaving, is equivalent to a serial execution.

Even if the concurrency control mechanism is lock-based or it manages multiple record versions, it must prevent all phenomena to ensure serializable transactions. Preventing all phenomena mentioned by the SQL standard (dirty reads, non-repeatable reads and phantom reads) is not enough, and Serializable must protect against lost update, read skew and write skew as well.

In practice, the concurrency control implementation details leak, and not all relational database systems provide a truly Serializable isolation level (some data integrity anomalies might still occur).

Table 6.5: Serializable phenomena occurrence

Phenomena Oracle SQL Server SQL Server MVCC PostgreSQL MySQL Dirty Write No No No No No Dirty Read No No No No No Non-Repeatable Read No No No No No Phantom Read No No No No No Read Skew No No No No No Write Skew Yes No Yes No No Lost Update No No No No No

Oracle

The Serializable isolation level is, in fact, an MVCC implementation of the Snapshot Isolation concurrency control mechanism. Like the Repeatable Read isolation in PostgreSQL, Oracle cannot prevent write skews, meaning it cannot provide a truly serializable transaction.

SQL Server

The Serializable isolation level is based on 2PL, and all phenomena are therefore prevented. The MVCC-based Snapshot Isolation is close to Oracle Serializable and PostgreSQL Repeatable Read, and so it allows write skews.

PostgreSQL

To overcome the Snapshot Isolation limitations, PostgreSQL has developed the Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI), which provides true serializable transactions. Because SSI is still an MVCC implementation, PostgreSQL monitors the transaction schedule and detects possible serializability anomalies.

The current implementation may detect false positivesa, and some transactions might get aborted even if they did not really break transaction serializability. Only the Precisely Serializable Snapshot Isolation (PSSI) model can eliminate all false positives, but the performance penalty being too high, the database implementers stuck to SSI instead.

ahttp://drkp.net/papers/ssi-vldb[^12].pdf

MySQL

The Serializable isolation builds on top of Repeatable Read with the difference that every record that gets selected is protected with a shared lock as well. The lock-based approach allows MySQL to prevent the write skew phenomena, which is prevalent among many Snapshot Isolation implementations.

6.4 Durability

When purchasing an airline ticket, the money is withdrawn from the bank account, and a seat is reserved for the given buyer. Assuming that, right after the ticket is purchased, the airline reservation system crashes, all the previously processed transactions must hold true even after the system restarts. If the system does not enforce this requirement, the registered ticket might vanish, and the buyer is possibly left with a debited account and no ticket at all.

Durability ensures that all committed transaction changes become permanent.

Durability allows system recoverability, and, to some extent, it is similar to the rolling back mechanism.

What about undo logs?

To support transaction rollbacks and to rebuild previous versions in MVCC systems, the database system already records the current modifications (including uncommitted changes) in the undo log. However, recoverability needs committed changes only, and, because the obsolete undo segments might be frequently recycled, the undo log alone is not suitable for recoverability.

When a transaction is committed, the database persists all current changes in an appendonly, sequential data structure commonly known as the redo log.

Oracle

The redo loga consists of multiple redo records, each one containing change vectors, which capture the actual data block changes. For performance reasons, the redo records are stored in a buffer, and the Log Writer flushes the in-memory records to the current active redo log file. At any given time, Oracle has, at least, two redo files, but only one of them is active and available for collecting the log buffer entries. When a transaction is committed, the database flushes the buffer and changes become persisted.

If the buffer fills, Oracle will flush it along with any uncommitted changes, which can be removed if their associated transaction is rolled back.

ahttps://docs.oracle.com/database/121/ADMIN/onlineredo.htm#ADMIN[^11302]

SQL Server

Unlike Oracle, SQL Server combines both the undo and the redo log into a single data structure called transaction log. By default, when a transaction is committed, all the associated transaction log entries are flushed to the disk before returning the control back to the client.

SQL Server 2014 added support for configurable durabilitya. The log entry flushing can be delayed, which can provide better I/O utilization and lower transaction response times. If the system crashes, all the unflushed log entries will be wiped out from memory. Asynchronous flushing is, therefore, appropriate only when data loss is tolerated.

ahttps://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dn[^449490].aspx

PostgreSQL

Statement changes are captured in the Write-Ahead Log (WAL)a. The log entries are buffered in memory and flushed on every transaction commit.

Because their state can be restored from the WAL during recovery, the cached data pages and index entries need not be flushed for every transaction (therefore optimizing I/O utilization). Ever since 9.1b, PostgreSQL supports configurable durability, so the WAL can also be flushed asynchronously.

ahttp://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/wal-intro.html bhttp://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/non-durability.html

MySQL

All the redo log entries associated with a single transaction are stored in the mini transaction buffer and flushed at once into the global redo buffer. The global buffer is flushed to disk during commit. By default, there are two log files which are used alternatively.

Flushing is done synchronously by default, but it can be switched to an asynchronous mode via the innodb_flush_log_at_trx_commita parameter.

ahttp://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/innodb-parameters.html#sysvar_innodb_flush_log_at_trx_ commit

Since durability is very important for business operations, it is better to stick to the synchronous flushing mechanism.

Delaying durability guarantees becomes a valid option only when data loss is tolerated by business requirements and the redo log flushing is a real performance bottleneck.

6.5 Read-only transactions

The JDBC Connection defines the setReadOnly(boolean readOnly)[^7] method which can be used to hint the driver to apply some database optimizations for the upcoming read-only transactions. This method should not be called in the middle of a transaction because the database system cannot turn a read-write transaction into a read-only one (a transaction must start as read-only from the very beginning).

Oracle

According to the JDBC driver documentationa, the database server does not support readonly transaction optimizations. Even when the read-only Connection status is set to true, modifying statements are still permitted, and the only way to restrict such statements is to execute the following SQL command:

connection.setAutoCommit(false);
try(CallableStatement statement = connection.prepareCall(

"BEGIN SET TRANSACTION READ ONLY; END;")) {

statement.execute();
}

The SET TRANSACTION READ ONLY command must run after disabling the auto-commit status, as otherwise it is only applied for this particular statement only.

ahttps://docs.oracle.com/database/121/JJDBC/apxtips.htm#JJDBC[^28956]

[^7]: <http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/sql/Connection.html#setReadOnly%28boolean%29>

SQL Server

Like Oracle, the read-only Connection does not propagate to the database engine, and the only way to disable SQL modifications is to use a separate account, restricted to viewing data only.

Setting the ApplicationIntent=ReadOnlya connection property does not prevent the JDBC driver from executing modifying statements on a read-only Connection. This property has the purpose of routing read-write and read-only connections to replica nodes instead.

ahttps://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/gg[^471494].aspx

PostgreSQL

An exception is thrown when executing a modifying statement on a Connection whose readonly status was set to true.

The database engine optimizes read-only transactions, so the false-positives anomaly rate is reduced for the Serializable isolation level, and it allows deferrable serializable snapshotsa. A deferrable snapshot is activated when executing SET TRANSACTION SERIALIZABLE READ

ONLY DEFERRABLE. The current transaction must wait for a safe snapshot to become available, which can be executed without the risk of being aborted by a non-serializable anomaly. If the default read-write Serializable transactions are problematic when accessing large volumes of data, the deferrable snapshots might be a better alternative for long-running transactions.

ahttp://arxiv.org/pdf/1208.4179.pdf

MySQL

If a modifying statement is executed when the Connection is set to read-only, the JDBC driver will throw an exception.

InnoDB can optimize read-only transactionsa because it can skip the transaction ID generation as it is not required for read-only transactions.

ahttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/innodb-performance-ro-txn.html

6.5.1 Read-only transaction routing

Setting up a database replication environment is useful for both high-availability (a Slave can replace a crashing Master) and traffic splitting. In a Master-Slave replication topology, the Master node accepts both read-write and read-only transactions, while Slave nodes only take read-only traffic.

Oracle

The Oracle ADG (Active Data Guard) allows an enterprise application to distribute read-write traffic to the Primary node and read-only transactions to a Standby database. WebLogic Server GridLink Data Sourcea provides failover and load balancing capabilities over Oracle ADG.

ahttp://www.oracle.com/technetwork/middleware/weblogic/learnmore/1534212

SQL Server

The database Availability Group must be configured to use read-only routing, in which case the redirection is based on the ApplicationIntent connection property. This means that the application requires separate DataSource(s) for read-write and read-only connections, and transaction routing must initiate in the application service layer.

PostgreSQL

The JDBC driver defines two connection propertiesa for load balancing purposes: loadBalanceHosts (which is disabled by default) and targetServerType (master or preferSlave). To enable transaction routing, the application must do the routing itself using separate DataSource(s).

ahttps://jdbc.postgresql.org/documentation/head/connect.html

MySQL

The com.mysql.jdbc.ReplicationDrivera supports transaction routing on a Master-Slave topology, the decision being made on the Connection read-only status basis.

ahttps://dev.mysql.com/doc/connector-j/en/connector-j-master-slave-replication-connection.html

Even if the JDBC driver does not support Master-Slave routing, the application can do it using multiple DataSource instances. This design cannot rely on the read-only status of the underlying Connection since the routing must take place before a database connection is fetched.

Figure 6.11: Transaction routing

If the transaction manager supports declarative read-only transactions, the routing decision can be taken based on the current transaction read-only preference. Otherwise, the routing must be done manually in each service layer component, and so a read-only transaction uses a read-only DataSource or a read-only JPA Persistence Context.

6.6 Transaction boundaries

Every database statement executes in the context of a database transaction, even if the client does not explicitly set transaction boundaries. While there might be single statement transactions (usually a read-only query), when the unit of work consists of multiple SQL statements, the database should wrap them all in a single unit of work.

By default, every Connection starts in auto-commit mode, each statement being executed in a separate transaction. Unfortunately, it does not work for multi-statement transactions as it moves atomicity boundaries from the logical unit of work to each individual statement.

Auto-commit should be avoided as much as possible, and, even for single statement transactions, it is good practice to mark the transaction boundaries explicitly.

In the following example, a sum of money is transferred between two bank accounts. The balance must always be consistent, so if an account gets debited, the other one must always be credited with the same amount of money.

try(Connection connection = dataSource.getConnection();

PreparedStatement transferStatement = connection.prepareStatement(

"UPDATE account SET balance = ? WHERE id = ?"
)) {
transferStatement.setLong(1, Math.negateExact(cents));
transferStatement.setLong(2, fromAccountId);
transferStatement.executeUpdate();

transferStatement.setLong(1, cents);
transferStatement.setLong(2, toAccountId);
transferStatement.executeUpdate();
}

Because of the auto-commit mode, if the second statement failed, only those particular changes could be rolled back, the first statement being already committed cannot be reverted anymore.

The default auto-commit mode must be disabled and the transaction has to be managed manually. The transaction is committed if every statement runs successfully and a rollback is triggered on a failure basis. With this in mind, the previous example should be rewritten as follows:

try(Connection connection = dataSource.getConnection()) {

connection.setAutoCommit(false);
try(PreparedStatement transferStatement = connection.prepareStatement(

"UPDATE account SET balance = ? WHERE id = ?"
)) {

transferStatement.setLong(1, Math.negateExact(cents));
transferStatement.setLong(2, fromAccountId);
transferStatement.executeUpdate();

transferStatement.setLong(1, cents);
transferStatement.setLong(2, toAccountId);
transferStatement.executeUpdate();

connection.commit();
} catch (SQLException e) {

connection.rollback();
throw e;
}
}

The astute reader might notice that the previous example breaks the Single responsibility principle since the Data Access Object (DAO) method mixes both transaction management and data access logic. Transaction management is a cross-cutting concern, making it a good candidate for being moved to a separate common library. This way, the transaction management logic resides in one place, and a lot of duplicated code can be removed from the DAO methods. One way to extract the transaction management logic is to use the Template method pattern:

public void transact(Consumer<Connection> callback) {

Connection connection = null;
try {

connection = dataSource.getConnection();
callback.accept(connection);
connection.commit();
} catch (Exception e) {

if (connection != null) {

try {

connection.rollback();
} catch (SQLException ex) {

throw new DataAccessException(e);
}
}
throw (e instanceof DataAccessException ?

(DataAccessException) e : new DataAccessException(e));
} finally {

if(connection != null) {

try {

connection.close();
} catch (SQLException e) {

throw new DataAccessException(e);
}
}
}
}

Transactions should never be abandoned on failure, and it is mandatory to initiate a transaction rollback (to allow the database to revert any uncommitted changes and release any lock as soon as possible).

With this utility in hand, the previous example can be simplified to:

transact((Connection connection) -> {

try(PreparedStatement transferStatement = connection.prepareStatement(

"UPDATE account SET balance = ? WHERE id = ?"
)) {

transferStatement.setLong(1, Math.negateExact(cents));
transferStatement.setLong(2, fromAccountId);
transferStatement.executeUpdate();

transferStatement.setLong(1, cents);
transferStatement.setLong(2, toAccountId);
transferStatement.executeUpdate();
} catch (SQLException e) {

throw new DataAccessException(e);
}
});

Although better than the first code snippet, separating data access logic and transaction management is not sufficient.

The transaction boundaries are still rigid, and, to include multiple data access method in a single database transaction, the Connection object has to be carried out as a parameter to every single DAO method.

Declarative transactions can better address this issue by breaking the strong coupling between the data access logic and the transaction management code. Transaction boundaries are marked with metadata (e.g. annotations) and a separate transaction manager abstraction is in charge of coordinating transaction logic.

Java EE and JTA

Declarative transactions become a necessity for distributed transactions. When Java EE (Enterprise Edition) first emerged, application servers hosted both web applications and middleware integration services, which meant that the Java EE container needed to coordinate multiple DataSource(s) or even JMS (Java Messaging) queues.

Following the X/Open XA architecture, JTA (Java Transaction API) powers the Java EE distributed transactions requirements.

6.6.1 Distributed transactions

The difference between local and global transactions is that the former uses a single resource manager, while the latter operates on multiple heterogeneous resource managers. The ACID guarantees are still enforced on each individual resource, but a global transaction manager is mandatory to orchestrate the distributed transaction outcome.

All transactional resource adapters are registered by the global transaction manager, which decides when a resource is allowed to commit or rollback. The Java EE managed resources become accessible through JNDI (Java Naming and Directory Interface) or CDI (Contexts and Dependency Injection).

Spring provides a transaction management abstraction layer which can be configured to either use local transactions (JDBC or RESOURCE_LOCAL[^8] JPA) or global transactions through a stand-alone JTA transaction manager. The dependency injection mechanism autowires managed resources into Spring beans.

6.6.1.1 Two-phase commit

JTA makes use of the two-phase commit (2PC) protocol to coordinate the atomic resource commitment in two steps: a prepare and a commit phase.

Figure 6.12: Two-phase commit protocol

In the former phase, a resource manager takes all the necessary actions to prepare the transaction for the upcoming commit. Only if all resource managers successfully acknowledge the preparation step, the transaction manager proceeds with the commit phase. If one resource does not acknowledge the prepare phase, the transaction manager will proceed to roll back all current participants.

If all resource managers acknowledge the commit phase, the global transaction will end successfully.

[^8]: <http://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/persistence/spi/PersistenceUnitTransactionType.html#RESOURCE_LOCAL>

If one resource fails to commit (or times out), the transaction manager will have to retry this operation in a background thread until it either succeeds or reports the incident for manual intervention.

The one-phase commit (1PC) optimization

Because Java EE uses JTA transactions exclusively, the extra coordination overhead of the additional database roundtrip may hurt performance in a high-throughput application environment. When a transaction enlists only one resource adapter (designating a single resource manager), the transaction manager can skip the prepare phase, and either execute the commit or the rollback phase. With this optimization, the distributed transaction behaves similarly to how JDBC Connection(s) manage local transactions.

The XAResource.commit(Xid xid, boolean onePhasea method takes a boolean flag, which the transaction manager sets to true to hint the associated resource adapter to initiate the 1PC optimization.

ahttps://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/transaction/xa/XAResource.html#commit-javax.transaction.xa. Xid-boolean-

6.6.2 Declarative transactions

Transaction boundaries are usually associated with a Service layer, which uses one or more DAO to fulfill the business logic. The transaction propagates from one component to the other within the service-layer transaction boundaries.

Figure 6.13: Transaction boundaries

The declarative transaction model is supported by both Java EE and Spring. Transaction boundaries are controlled through similar propagation strategies, which define how boundaries are inherited or disrupted at the borderline between the outermost component (in the current call stack) and the current one (waiting to be invoked).

Propagation

To configure the transaction propagation strategy for EJB components, Java EE defines the

@TransactionAttributea annotation. Since Java EE 7, even non-EJB components can now be enrolled in a transactional context if they are augmented with the @Transactionalb annotation.

In Spring, transaction propagation (like any other transaction properties) is configurable via the @Transactionalc annotation.

ahttp://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/ejb/TransactionAttribute.html bhttp://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/transaction/Transactional.html chttps://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/transaction/annotation/ Transactional.html#propagation--

Table 6.6: Transaction propagation strategies

Propagation Java EE Spring Description REQUIRED Yes Yes This is the default propagation strategy, and it only starts a transaction unless the current thread is not already associated with a transaction context

REQUIRES_NEW Yes Yes Any currently running transaction context is suspended and replaced by a new transaction

SUPPORTS Yes Yes If the current thread already runs inside a transaction, this method will use it. Otherwise, it executes outside of a transaction context

NOT_SUPPORTED Yes Yes Any currently running transaction context is suspended, and the current method is run outside of a transaction context

MANDATORY Yes Yes The current method runs only if the current thread is already associated with a transaction context

NESTED No Yes The current method is executed within a nested transaction if the current thread is already associated with a transaction. Otherwise, a new transaction is started.

NEVER Yes Yes The current method must always run outside of a transaction context, and, if the current thread is associated with a transaction, an exception will be thrown.

Declarative exception handling

Since the transaction logic wraps around the underlying service and data access logic call chain, the exception handling must also be configured declaratively. By default, both Java EE and Spring roll back on system exceptions (any RuntimeException) and commit on application exceptions (checked exceptions).

In Java EE, the rollback policy can be customized using the @ApplicationExceptiona annotation.

Spring allows each transaction to customize the rolling back policyb by listing the exception types triggering a transaction failure.

ahttp://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/ejb/ApplicationException.html bhttps://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/transaction/annotation/ Transactional.html#rollbackFor--

Declarative read-only transactions

Java EE does not support read-only transactions to be marked declaratively.

Spring offers the transactional read-only attributea, which can propagate to the underlying JPA provider (to optimize the EntityManager flushing mechanism) and to the current associated JDBC Connection.

ahttps://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/transaction/annotation/ Transactional.html#readOnly--

Declarative isolation levels

The Java EE does not offer support for configurable isolation levels, so it is up to the underlying DataSource to define it for all database connections.

Spring supports transaction-level isolation levelsa when using the JpaTransactionManagerb. For JTA transactions, the JtaTransactionManagerc follows the Java EE standard and disallows overriding the default isolation level. As a workaround, the Spring framework provides extension points, so the application developer can customize the default behavior and implement a mechanism to set isolation levels on a transaction basis.

ahttps://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/transaction/annotation/ Transactional.html#isolation--

bhttps://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/orm/jpa/ JpaTransactionManager.html

chttps://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/transaction/jta/ JtaTransactionManager.html

6.7 Application-level transactions

So far, the book focused on database transactions to enforce ACID properties. However, from the application perspective, a business workflow might span over multiple physical database transactions, in which case the database ACID guarantees are not sufficient anymore. A logical transaction may be composed of multiple web requests, including user think time, for which reason it can be visualized as a long conversation.

In the following example, Alice and a background process are concurrently modifying the same database record.

Figure 6.14: Stateless conversation losing updates

Because Alice logical transaction encloses two separate web requests, each one associated with a separate database transaction, without an additional concurrency control mechanism, even the strongest isolation level cannot prevent the lost update phenomena.

Spanning a database transaction over multiple web requests is prohibitive since locks would be held during user think time, therefore hurting scalability. Even with MVCC, the cost of maintaining previous versions (that can lead to a large version graph) can escalate and affect both performance and concurrency. Application-level transactions require application-level concurrency control mechanisms.

HTTP is stateless by nature and, for very good reasons, stateless applications are easier to scale than stateful ones. However, application-level transactions cannot be stateless, as otherwise newer requests would not continue from where the previous request was left. Preserving state across multiple web requests allows building a conversational context, providing application-level repeatable reads guarantees.

In the next diagram, Alice uses a stateful conversational context, but, in the absence of a record versioning system, it is still possible to lose updates.

Figure 6.15: Stateful conversation losing updates

Without Alice to notice, the batch process resets the product quantity. Thinking the product version has not changed, Alice attempts to purchase one item which decreases the previous product quantity by one. In the end, Alice has simply overwritten the batch processor modification, and data integrity has been compromised.

So the application-level repeatable reads are not self-sufficient (this argument is true for database isolation levels as well). To prevent lost updates, a concurrency control mechanism becomes mandatory.

6.7.1 Pessimistic and optimistic locking

Isolation levels entail implicit locking, whether it involves physical locks (like 2PL) or data anomaly detection (MVCC). To coordinate state changes, application-level concurrency control makes use of explicit locking, which comes in two flavors: pessimistic and optimistic locking.

6.7.1.1 Pessimistic locking

As previously explained, most database systems already offer the possibility of manually requesting shared or exclusive locks. This concurrency control is said to be pessimistic because it assumes that conflicts are bound to happen, and so they must be prevented accordingly.

As locks can be released in a timely fashion, exclusive locking is appropriate during the last database transaction of a given long conversation. This way, the application can guarantee that, once locks are acquired, no other transaction can interfere with the currently locked resources.

Acquiring locks on critical records can prevent non-repeatable reads, lost updates, as well as read and write skew phenomena.

6.7.1.2 Optimistic locking

Undoubtedly a misnomer (albeit rather widespread), optimistic locking does not incur any locking at all. A much better name would be optimistic concurrency control since it uses a totally different approach to managing conflicts than pessimistic locking.

MVCC is an optimistic concurrency control strategy since it assumes that contention is unlikely to happen, and so it does not rely on locking for controlling access to shared resources. The optimistic concurrency mechanisms detect anomalies and resort to aborting transactions whose invariants no longer hold.

While the database knows exactly which row versions have been issued in a given time interval, the application is left to maintaining a happens-before event ordering. Each database row must have an associated version, which is locally incremented by the logical transaction. Every modifying SQL statement (update or delete) uses the previously loaded version as an assumption that the row has not been changed in the meanwhile.

Because even the lowest isolation level can prevent write-write conflicts, only one transaction is allowed to update a row version at any given time. Since the database already offers monotonic updates, the row versions can also be incremented monotonically, and the application can detect when an updating record has become stale.

The optimistic locking concurrency algorithm looks like this:

When a client reads a particular row, its version comes along with the other fields.

Upon updating a row, the client filters the current record by the version it has previously loaded.

UPDATE product
SET (quantity, version) = (4, 2)
WHERE id = 1 AND version = 1

If the statement update count is zero, the version was incremented in the meanwhile, and the current transaction now operates on a stale record version.

The previous example can be adjusted to take advantage of this optimistic concurrency control mechanism. This time, the product is versioned, and both the web application and the batch processor data access logic are using the row versions to coordinate the happensbefore update ordering.

Figure 6.16: Stateful conversation preventing lost updates

Both Alice and the batch processor try to increment the product version optimistically. The batch processor can successfully update the product quantity since the SQL statement filtering criteria matches the actual database record version.

When Alice tries to update the product, the database returns a zero update count, and, this way, she is notified about the concurrent update that happened in the meanwhile.

The lost update can be prevented because the application can abort the current transaction when being notified of the stale record versions.

II JPA and Hibernate

7. Why JPA and Hibernate matter

Although JDBC does a very good job of exposing a common API that hides the database vendor-specific communication protocol, it suffers from the following shortcomings:

The API is undoubtedly verbose, even for trivial tasks.

Batching is not transparent from the data access layer perspective, requiring a specific API than its non-batched statement counterpart.

Lack of built-in support for explicit locking and optimistic concurrency control.

For local transactions, the data access is tangled with transaction management semantics.

Fetching joined relations requires additional processing to transform the ResultSet into Domain Models or DTO (Data Transfer Object) graphs.

Although the primary goal of an ORM (Object-Relational Mapping) tool is to automatically translate object state transitions into SQL statements, this chapter aims to demonstrate that Hibernate can address all the aforementioned JDBC shortcomings.

Java Persistence history

The EJB 1.1 release offered a higher-level persistence abstraction through scalable enterprise components, known as Entity Beans. Although the design looked good on paper, in reality, the heavyweight RMI-based implementation proved to be disastrous from a performance perspective. Neither the EJB 2.0 support for local interfaces could revive the Entity Beans popularity, and, due to high-complexity and vendor-specific implementation details, most projects chose JDBC instead.

Hibernate was born out of all the frustration of using the Entity Bean developing model. As an open-source project, Hibernate managed to gain a lot of popularity, and so it soon became the de facto Java persistence framework.

In response to all the criticism associated with Entity Bean persistence, the Java Community Process advanced a lightweight POJO-based approach, and the JDO specification was born. Although JDO is data source agnostic, being capable of operating with both relation databases as well as NoSQL or even flat files, it never managed to hit mainstream popularity. For this reason, the Java Community Process decided that EJB[^3] would be based on a new specification, inspired by Hibernate and TopLink, and JPA (Java Persistence API) became the standard Java persistence technology.

The morale of this is that persistence is a very complex topic, and it demands a great deal of knowledge of both the database and the data access usage patterns.

7.1 The impedance mismatch

When a relational database is manipulated through an object-oriented program, the two different data representations start conflicting.

In a relational database, data is stored in tables, and the relational algebra defines how data associations are formed. On the other hand, an object-oriented programming (OOP) language allows objects to have both state and behavior, and bidirectional associations are permitted.

The burden of converging these two distinct approaches has generated much tension, and it has been haunting enterprise systems for a very long time.

Figure 7.1: Object/Relational Mapping

The above diagram portrays the two different schemas that the data access layer needs to correlate. While the database schema is driven by the SQL standard specification, the Domain Model comes with an object-oriented schema representation as well.

The Domain Model encapsulates the business logic specifications and captures both data structures and the behavior that governs business requirements. OOP facilitates Domain Modeling, and many modern enterprise systems are implemented on top of an objectoriented programming language.

Because the underlying data resides in a relational database, the Domain Model must be adapted to the database schema and the SQL-driven communication protocol. The ORM design pattern helps to bridge these two different data representations and close the technological gap between them. Every database row is associated with a Domain Model object (Entity in JPA terminology), and so the ORM tool can translate the entity state transitions into DML statements.

From an application development point of view, this is very convenient since it is much easier to manipulate Domain Model relationships rather than visualizing the business logic through its underlying SQL statements.

7.2 JPA vs. Hibernate

JPA is only a specification. It describes the interfaces that the client operates with and the standard object-relational mapping metadata (Java annotations or XML descriptors). Beyond the API definition, JPA also explains (although not exhaustively) how these specifications are ought to be implemented by the JPA providers. JPA evolves with the Java EE platform itself (Java EE 6 featuring JPA 2.0 and Java EE 7 introducing JPA 2.1).

Hibernate was already a full-featured Java ORM implementation by the time the JPA specification was released for the first time. Although it implements the JPA specification, Hibernate retains its native API for both backward compatibility and to accommodate non-standard features.

Even if it is best to adhere to the JPA standard, in reality, many JPA providers offer additional features targeting a high-performance data access layer requirements. For this purpose, Hibernate comes with the following non-JPA compliant features:

extended identifier generators (hi/lo, pooled, pooled-lo)

transparent prepared statement batching

customizable CRUD (@SQLInsert, @SQLUpdate, @SQLDelete) statements

static/dynamic entity/collection filters (e.g. @FilterDef, @Filter, @Where)

mapping attributes to SQL fragments (e.g. @Formula)

immutable entities (e.g. @Immutable)

more flush modes (e.g. FlushMode.MANUAL, FlushMode.ALWAYS)

querying the second-level cache by the natural key of a given entity

entity-level cache concurrency strategies (e.g. Cache(usage = CacheConcurrencyStrategy.READ_WRITE))

versioned bulk updates through HQL

exclude fields from optimistic locking check (e.g. @OptimisticLock(excluded = true))

versionless optimistic locking (e.g. OptimisticLockType.ALL, OptimisticLockType.DIRTY)

support for skipping (without waiting) pessimistic lock requests

support for Java 8 Date and Time and stream()

support for multitenancy

If JPA is the interface, Hibernate is one implementation and implementation details always matter from a performance perspective.

The JPA implementation details leak and ignoring them might hinder application performance or even lead to data inconsistency issues. As an example, the following JPA attributes have a peculiar behavior, which can surprise someone who is familiar with the JPA specification only:

The FlushModeType.AUTO[^1] does not trigger a flush for native SQL queries like it does for JPQL or Criteria API.

The FetchType.EAGER[^2] might choose a SQL join or a secondary select whether the entity is fetched directly from the EntityManager or through a JPQL (Java Persistence Query Language) or a Criteria API query.

That is why this book is focused on how Hibernate manages to implement both the JPA specification and its non-standard native features (that are relevant from an efficiency perspective).

Portability concerns

Like other non-functional requirements, portability is a feature, and there is still a widespread fear of embracing database-specific or framework-specific features. In reality, it is more common to encounter enterprise applications facing data access performance issues than having to migrate from one technology to the other (be it a relational database or a JPA provider).

The lowest common denominator of many RDBMS is a superset of the SQL-92 standard (although not entirely supported either). SQL-99 supports Common Table Expressions, but MySQL 5.7 does not. Although SQL-2003 defines the MERGE operator, PostgreSQL 9.5 favored the UPSERT operation instead. By adhering to a SQL-92 syntax, one could achieve a higher degree of database portability, but the price of giving up database-specific features can take a toll on application performance. Portability can be addressed either by subtracting noncommon features or through specialization. By offering different implementations, for each supported database system (like the jOOQ framework does), portability can still be achieved.

The same argument is valid for JPA providers too. By layering the application, it is already much easier to swap JPA providers, if there is even a compelling reason for switching one mature JPA implementation with another.

[^1]: <https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/persistence/FlushModeType.html>

[^2]: <https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/persistence/FetchType.html#EAGER>

7.3 Schema ownership

Because of data representation duality, there has been a rivalry between taking ownership of the underlying schema. Although theoretically, both the database and the Domain Model could drive the schema evolution, for practical reasons, the schema belongs to the database.

An enterprise system might be too large to fit into a single application, so it is not uncommon to split in into multiple subsystems, each one serving a specific goal. As an example, there can be front-end web applications, integration web services, email schedulers, full-text search engines and back-end batch processors that need to load data into the system. All these subsystems need to use the underlying database, whether it is for displaying content to the users or dumping data into the system.

Figure 7.2: Database-centric integration

Although it might not fit any enterprise system, having the database as a central integration point can still be a choice for many reasonable size enterprise systems.

The relational database concurrency models offer strong consistency guarantees, therefore having a significant advantage to application development. If the integration point does not provide transactional semantics, it will be much more difficult to implement a distributed concurrency control mechanism.

Most database systems already offer support for various replication topologies, which can provide more capacity for accommodating an increase in the incoming request traffic. Even if the demand for more data continues to grow, the hardware is always getting better and better (and cheaper too), and database vendors keep on improving their engines to cope with more data.

For these reasons, having the database as an integration point is still a relevant enterprise system design consideration.

The distributed commit log

For very large enterprise systems, where data is split among different providers (relational database systems, caches, Hadoop, Spark), it is no longer possible to rely on the relational database to integrate all disparate subsystems.

In this case, Apache Kafkaa offers a fault-tolerant and scalable append-only log structure, which every participating subsystem can read and write concurrently.

Figure 7.3: Distributed commit log integration

The commit log becomes the integration point, each distributed node individually traversing it and maintaining client-specific pointers in the sequential log structure. This design resembles a database replication mechanism, and so it offers durability (the log is persisted on disk), write performance (append-only logs do not require random access) and read performance (concurrent reads do not require blocking) as well.

ahttp://kafka.apache.org/

No matter what architecture style is chosen, there is still need to correlate the transient Domain Model with the underlying persistent data.

The data schema evolves along the enterprise system itself, and so the two different schema representations must remain congruent at all times.

Even if the data access framework can auto-generate the database schema, the schema must be migrated incrementally, and all changes need to be traceable in the VCS (Version Control System) as well. Along with table structure, indexes and triggers, the database schema is, therefore, accompanying the Domain Model source code itself. A tool like Flywaydb[^3] can automate the database schema migration, and the system can be deployed continuously, whether it is a test or a production environment.

[^3]: <http://flywaydb.org/>

The schema ownership goes to the database, and the data access layer must assist the Domain Model to communicate with the underlying data.

7.4 Entity state transitions

JPA shifts the developer mindset from SQL statements to entity state transitions. An entity can be in one of the following states:

Table 7.1: JPA entity states

State Description New (Transient) A newly created entity which is not mapped to any database row is considered to be in the New or Transient state. Once it becomes managed, the Persistence Context issues an insert statement at flush time.

Managed (Persistent) A Persistent entity is associated with a database row, and it is being managed by the currently running Persistence Context. State changes are detected by the dirty checking mechanism and propagated to the database as update statements at flush time.

Detached Once the currently running Persistence Context is closed, all the previously managed entities become detached. Successive changes are no longer tracked, and no automatic database synchronization is going to happen.

Removed A removed entity is only scheduled for deletion, and the actual database delete statement is executed during Persistence Context flushing.

The Persistence Context captures entity state changes, and, during flushing, it translates them into SQL statements. The JPA EntityManager[^4] and the Hibernate Session[^5] (which includes additional methods for moving an entity from one state to the other) interfaces are gateways towards the underlying Persistence Context, and they define all the entity state transition operations.

[^4]: <http://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/persistence/EntityManager.html#persist-java.lang.Object->

[^5]: <https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/current/javadocs/org/hibernate/Session.html>

Figure 7.4: JPA entity state transitions

Figure 7.5: Hibernate entity state transitions

7.5 Write-based optimizations

SQL injection prevention

By managing the SQL statement generation, the JPA tool can assist in minimizing the risk of SQL injection attacks. The less the chance of manipulating SQL String statements, the safer the application can get. The risk is not completely eliminated because the application developer can still recur to concatenating SQL or JPQL fragments, so rigor is advised.

Hibernate uses PreparedStatement(s) exclusively, so not only it protects against SQL injection, but the data access layer can better take advantage of server-side and clientside statement caching as well.

Auto-generated DML statements

The enterprise system database schema evolves with time, and the data access layer must mirror all these modifications as well.

Because the JPA provider auto-generates insert and update statements, the data access layer can easily accommodate database table structure modifications. By updating the entity model schema, Hibernate can automatically adjust the modifying statements accordingly.

This applies to changing database column types as well. If the database schema needs to migrate a postal code from an INT database type to a VARCHAR(6), the data access layer will need only to change the associated Domain Model attribute type from an Integer to a

String, and all statements are going to be automatically updated. Hibernate defines a highly customizable JDBC-to-database type mapping system, and the application developer can override a default type association, or even add support for new database types (that are not currently supported by Hibernate).

The entity fetching process is automatically managed by the JPA implementation, which autogenerates the select statements of the associated database tables. This way, JPA can free the application developer from maintaining entity selection queries as well.

Hibernate allows customizing all the CRUD statements, in which case the application developer is responsible for maintaining the associated DML statements.

Although it takes care of the entity selection process, most enterprise systems need to take advantage of the underlying database querying capabilities. For this reason, whenever the database schema changes, all the native SQL queries need to be updated manually (according to their associated business logic requirements).

Write-behind cache

The Persistence Context acts as a transactional write-behind cache, deferring entity state flushing up until the last possible moment.

Figure 7.6: Persistence Context

Because every modifying DML statement requires locking (to prevent dirty writes), the write behind cache can reduce the database lock acquisition interval, therefore increasing concurrency.

However, caches introduce consistency challenges, and the Persistence Context requires a flush prior to executing any JPQL or native SQL query, as otherwise it might break the read-your-own-write consistency guarantee.

As detailed in the following chapters, Hibernate does not automatically flush pending changes when a native query is about to be executed, and the application developer must explicitly instruct what database tables are needed to be synchronized.

Transparent statement batching

Since all changes are being flushed at once, Hibernate may benefit from batching JDBC statements. Batch updates can be enabled transparently, even after the data access logic has been implemented. Most often, performance tuning is postponed until the system is already running in production, and switching to batching statements should not require a considerable development effort.

With just one configuration, Hibernate can execute all prepared statements in
batches.

Application-level concurrency control

As previously explained, no database isolation level can protect against losing updates when executing a multi-request long conversation. JPA supports both optimistic and pessimistic locking.

The JPA optimistic locking mechanism allows preventing lost updates because it imposes a happens-before event ordering. However, in multi-request conversations, optimistic locking requires maintaining old entity snapshots, and JPA makes it possible through Extended Persistence Contexts or detached entities.

A Java EE application server can preserve a given Persistence Context across several web requests, therefore providing application-level repeatable reads. However, this strategy is not free since the application developer must make sure the Persistence Context is not bloated with too many entities, which, apart from consuming memory, it can also affect the performance of the Hibernate default dirty checking mechanism.

Even when not using Java EE, the same goal can be achieved using detached entities, which provide fine-grained control over the amount of data needed to be preserved from one web request to the other. JPA allows merging detached entities, which rebecome managed and automatically synchronized with the underlying database system.

JPA also supports a pessimistic locking query abstraction, which comes in handy when using lower-level transaction isolation modes.

Hibernate has a native pessimistic locking API, which brings support for timing out lock acquisition requests or skipping already acquired locks.

7.6 Read-based optimizations

Following the SQL standard, the JDBC ResultSet is a tabular representation of the underlying fetched data. The Domain Model being constructed as an entity graph, the data access layer must transform the flat ResultSet into a hierarchical structure.

Although the goal of the ORM tool is to reduce the gap between the object-oriented Domain Model and its relational counterpart, it is very important to remember that the source of data is not an in-memory repository, and the fetching behavior influences the overall data access efficiency.

The database cannot be abstracted out of this context, and pretending that entities can be manipulated just like any other plain objects is very detrimental to application performance. When it comes to reading data, the impedance mismatch becomes even more apparent, and, for performance reasons, it is mandatory to keep in mind the SQL statements associated with every fetching operation.

In the following example, the posts records are fetched along with all their associated comments. Using JDBC, this task can be accomplished using the following code snippet:

doInJDBC(connection -> {

try (PreparedStatement statement = connection.prepareStatement(

"SELECT * " +
"FROM post AS p " +
"JOIN post_comment AS pc ON p.id = pc.post_id " +
"WHERE " +
"
p.id BETWEEN ? AND ? + 1"
)) {

statement.setInt(1, id);
statement.setInt(2, id);
try (ResultSet resultSet = statement.executeQuery()) {

List<Post> posts = toPosts(resultSet);
assertEquals(expectedCount, posts.size());
}
} catch (SQLException e) {

throw new DataAccessException(e);
}
});

When joining many-to-one or one-to-one associations, each ResultSet record corresponds to a pair of entities, so both the parent and the child can be resolved in each iteration. For oneto-many or many-to-many relationships, because of how the SQL join works, the ResultSet contains a duplicated parent record for each associated child.

Constructing the hierarchical entity structure requires manual ResultSet transformation, and, to resolve duplicates, the parent entity references are stored in a Map structure.

List<Post> toPosts(ResultSet resultSet) throws SQLException {

Map<Long, Post> postMap = new LinkedHashMap<>();
while (resultSet.next()) {

Long postId = resultSet.getLong(1);
Post post = postMap.get(postId);
if(post == null) {

post = new Post(postId);
postMap.put(postId, post);
post.setTitle(resultSet.getString(2));
post.setVersion(resultSet.getInt(3));
}
PostComment comment = new PostComment();
comment.setId(resultSet.getLong(4));
comment.setReview(resultSet.getString(5));
comment.setVersion(resultSet.getInt(6));
post.addComment(comment);
}
return new ArrayList<>(postMap.values());
}

The JDBC 4.2 PreparedStatement supports only positional parameters, and the first ordinal starts from 1. JPA allows named parameters as well, which are especially useful when a parameter needs to be referenced multiple times, so the previous example can be rewritten as follows:

doInJPA(entityManager -> {

List<Post> posts = entityManager.createQuery(

"select distinct p " +
"from Post p " +
"join fetch p.comments " +
"where " +
"
p.id BETWEEN :id AND :id + 1", Post.class)
.setParameter("id", id)
.getResultList();
assertEquals(expectedCount, posts.size());
});

In both examples, the object-relation transformation takes place either implicitly or explicitly. In the JDBC use case, the associations must be manually resolved, while JPA does it automatically (based on the entity schema).

The fetching responsibility

Besides mapping database columns to entity attributes, the entity associations can also be represented in terms of object relationships. More, the fetching behavior can be hard-wired to the entity schema itself, which is most often a terrible thing to do.

Fetching multiple one-to-many or many-to-many associations is even more problematic because they might require a Cartesian Product, therefore affecting performance. Controlling the hard-wired schema fetching policy is cumbersome as it prevents overriding an eager retrieval with a lazy loading mechanism.

Each business use case has different data access requirements, and one policy cannot anticipate all possible use cases, so the fetching strategy should always be set up on a query basis.

Prefer projections for read-only views

Although it is very convenient to fetch entities along with all their associated relationships, it is better to take into consideration the performance impact as well. As previously explained, fetching too much data is not suitable because it increases the transaction response time.

In reality, not all use cases require loading entities, and not all read operations need to be served by the same fetching mechanism. Sometimes a custom projection (selecting only a few columns from an entity) is much more suitable, and the data access logic can even take advantage of database-specific SQL constructs that might not be supported by the JPA query abstraction.

As a rule of thumb, fetching entities is suitable when the logical transaction requires modifying them, even if that only happens in a successive web request. With this is mind, it is much easier to reason on which fetching mechanism to employ for a given business logic use case.

The second-level cache

If the Persistence Context acts as a transactional write-behind cache, its lifetime will be bound to that of a logical transaction. For this reason, the Persistence Context is also known as the first-level cache, and so it cannot be shared by multiple concurrent transactions.

On the other hand, the second-level cache is associated with an EntityManagerFactory, and all Persistence Contexts have access to it. The second-level cache can store entities as well as entity associations (one-to-many and many-to-many relationships) and even entity query results. Because JPA does not make it mandatory, each provider takes a different approach to caching (as opposed to EclipseLink, by default, Hibernate disables the second-level cache).

Most often, caching is a trade-off between consistency and performance. Because the cache becomes another source of truth, inconsistencies might occur, and they can be prevented only when all database modifications happen through a single EntityManagerFactory or a synchronized distributed caching solution. In reality, this is not practical since the application might be clustered on multiple nodes (each one with its own EntityManagerFactory) and the database might be accessed by multiple applications.

Although the second-level cache can mitigate the entity fetching performance issues, it requires a distributed caching implementation, which might not elude the networking penalties anyway.

7.7 Wrap-up

Bridging two highly-specific technologies is always a difficult problem to solve. When the enterprise system is built on top of an object-oriented language, the object-relational impedance mismatch becomes inevitable. The ORM pattern aims to close this gap although it cannot completely abstract it out.

In the end, all the communication flows through JDBC and every execution happens in the database engine itself. A high-performance enterprise application must resonate with the underlying database system, and the ORM tool must not disrupt this relationship.

Just like the problem it tries to solve, Hibernate is a very complex framework with many subtleties that require a thorough knowledge of both database systems, JDBC, and the framework itself. This chapter is only a summary, meant to present JPA and Hibernate into a different perspective that prepares the reader for high-performance object-relational mapping. There is no need to worry if some topics are not entirely clear because the upcoming chapters analyze all these concepts in greater detail.